---
name: ruby-and-r
layout: post
title: "Playing with Ruby Patterns in R"
date: 2018-01-25
author: Scott Chamberlain
sourceslug: _drafts/2018-01-25-ruby-and-r.Rmd
tags:
- R
- Ruby
---



I was returning to a long-term project I've been working on - a package for caching HTTP requests in R called [vcr][rvcr], a port of the Ruby gem [vcr][] - when you do that thing you do when you are porting a library from one language to another. I stumbled upon some methods/functions I wasn't familiar with. 

For example, [take_while](https://apidock.com/ruby/Array/take_while) I had never seeen before. It iterates over an array, returning the elements of the array that evalulate to `true` (for those new to Ruby, they use `true` instead of `TRUE` as we do in R) when passed through the function given. R has lists and vectors - R's lists are the most similar to Ruby arrays because both can have mixed objects in them (e.g., a string and an integer) while still retaining those objects as is. 

In another example, I had never seen [unshift](https://apidock.com/ruby/Array/unshift) or it's sister [shift](https://apidock.com/ruby/v1_9_3_392/Array/shift). `unshift` is pretty simple - it prepends objects to the front of the array. `shift` has more complicated behavior - called without values passed deletes first element of the array, AND returns that deleted value. With `shift` you can also pass an index that is treated as a range (e.g., `1` is treated as `0` and `1`; Ruby has zero based indexing, unlike R's 1 based indexing). 

Anyway, I wanted to explore these new Ruby methods more by trying to implement them in R. Thus, started a bag of functions package called [rubfuns][] for "Ruby functions" to play while being able to have documentation, etc. 

It's entirely possible the stuff in `rubfuns` is already implemented in R elsewhere - the point is for me to learn more about both Ruby and R.

A big difference between Ruby and R is that Rubys's arrays have methods that can be called on them, e.g. 

```ruby
a = [1, 2, 3]
a.count
=> 3
```

Whereas the equivalent in R requires passing the vector to a method, rather than calling the method on the object itself


```r
a = c(1, 2, 3)
length(a)
#> [1] 3
```

Of course one could create a `R6` object in R and add methods to that object that can be called on a vector:


```r
library("R6")
Vec <- R6::R6Class(
  "Vec",
  public = list(
    x = NULL,
    initialize = function(x) {
      self$x <- x
    },

    count = function() length(self$x)
  )
)
```


```r
myvec <- Vec$new(1:3)
myvec$count()
#> [1] 3
```

But that's not baked into R itself, so not ideal.

<br><br>

Anyway, on with `rubfuns`:


```r
devtools::install_github("ropenscilabs/rubfuns")
```


```r
library("rubfuns")
```

`take_while` 


```r
x <- c(1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 0)
x %>% take_while(function(z) z < 3)
#> [1] 1 2 0
x <- c(1, 2, 3, 4, 9, -1)
x %>% take_while(function(z) z < 3)
#> [1]  1  2 -1
```

`drop_while` is a similar function to `take_while` but drops the elements that when passed to the supplied function evaluate to `TRUE`


```r
x <- c(1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 0)
x %>% drop_while(function(z) z < 3)
#> [1] 3 4 5
x <- c(1, 2, 3, 4, 9, -1)
x %>% drop_while(function(z) z < 3)
#> [1] 3 4 9
```

`delete_at` was in interesting function I saw in [vcr][]. It deletes the elements of an array at the positions given (remember, 0 based indexing in Ruby)


```r
x <- c(1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 0)
delete_at(x, 5)
#> [1] 1 2 3 4 0
delete_at(x, 4:5)
#> [1] 1 2 3 0
```

`delete_if` is similar to `delete_at` but instead you pass a function that when evaluates to `TRUE` deletes that element


```r
x <- c(1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 0)
delete_if(x, function(z) z > 2)
#> [1] 1 2 0
delete_if(x, function(z) z < 4)
#> [1] 4 5
```

`unshift` is quite simple. it prepends whatever you pass to it to the front of the vector


```r
x <- c(1, 2, 3)
x %>% unshift(4)
#> [1] 4 1 2 3
```


`shift` is more complicated. called without any values deletes the first element. called with a value deletes all elements up to and including that value


```r
x <- c(1, 2, 3)
x %>% shift
#> [1] 2 3
x %>% shift(2)
#> [1] 3
```

<br>

That's all I've got so far. Will likely add more functions as time goes on.

<br><br>

Unfortunately we can't follow what Ruby does by being able to modify the vector or list while also returning something. There are of course ways to achieve this, e.g., `R6` solution above or something like [zeallot][] - but if it's not baked into the R language it seems less likely to get wide adoption.

**todo**: plan to make sure the functions work with vectors and lists


[rvcr]: https://github.com/ropensci/vcr
[vcr]: https://github.com/vcr/vcr
[rubfuns]: https://github.com/ropenscilabs/rubfuns
[zeallot]: https://github.com/nteetor/zeallot
